Alginate is a sugar from seaweed. On its own it is just
a floppy chain — but add calcium, and it snaps into a
gel. The way it does that has a lovely shape.
Certain stretches of the chain, the G-blocks, are buckled —
and two of them line up face to face.
Between them sit calcium ions, each cradled by the buckles
above and below — exactly like eggs nestled in an
egg carton. Those junctions lock the gel together.
Repeat that junction many times over and the floppy solution
becomes a springy, load-bearing solid that grips the sand grains.
There is an honest catch. Alginate dissolves in water — so every
rain shower washes a little of the gel away. That is why
it is one prong of three, not the whole answer.